Respiratory distress syndrome in the
newborn, also called neonatal RDS,
is one of the most critical conditions
you'll manage as a respiratory therapist in
the NICU.
And at its core, this disease is all about
one
problem, not enough surfactant.
Surfactant normally reduces surface
tension in the alveoli, allowing them
to stay open during exhalation.
But in premature infants, surfactant
production is insufficient.
So what happens?
The alveoli collapse.
This leads to decreased lung compliance,
increased work of breathing,
and widespread atelectasis.
As the lungs collapse, gas exchange
becomes impaired.
Oxygenation drops, carbon dioxide can
rise,
and the infant begins to show signs of
respiratory distress such as tachypnea,
nasal flaring, grunting, and retractions.
That grunting you hear?
It's the baby trying to create intrinsic
peep to keep the alveoli open.
From a diagnostic standpoint, you'll often
see a classic ground-
glass appearance on chest X-ray, along
with low lung
volumes.
Blood gases may initially show hypoxemia,
and as fatigue sets
in, rising carbon dioxide becomes a major
red flag.
Here's the clinical connection.
This is not just a lung problem, it's a
compliance
problem.
The stiffer the lungs, the harder the
infant has to
work to breathe.
And without intervention, that workload
leads to rapid fatigue and
potential respiratory failure.
Management is focused on one goal, keeping
alveolite open.
That means applying CPAP early to provide
continuous positive pressure,
improving functional residual capacity.
If distress worsens, you may need to
escalate to mechanical
ventilation.
One of the most important therapies is
surfactant replacement.
Administered via an endotracheal tube,
this directly addresses the root
cause and can dramatically improve lung
compliance and oxygenation.
Board Prep Tip.
Always associate neonatal RGS with
prematurity, surfactant deficiency,
decreased compliance, and the need for
CPAP or surfactant therapy.
And as the RT, your role is critical.
Monitoring work of breathing, oxygenation,
ventilatory
status, and response to therapy in real
time.
Recognizing early deterioration, like
increasing oxygen needs,
worsening retractions, or rising carbon
dioxide,
can make the difference between
stabilization and rapid decline.
Bottom line, neonatal RDS is a surfactant
problem that becomes
a ventilation problem.
Your job is to support the lungs, reduce
the work
of breathing, and intervene before fatigue
sets in.